Readme.md, before:

[![CI test](https://img.shields.io/github/actions/workflow/status/tiborschneider/prefix-trie/test.yml)](https://github.com/tiborschneider/prefix-trie/actions)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/tiborschneider/prefix-trie/branch/main/graph/badge.svg?token=EEJXNNURMW)](https://codecov.io/gh/tiborschneider/prefix-trie)
[![version](https://img.shields.io/crates/v/prefix-trie)](https://crates.io/crates/prefix-trie)
[![downloads](https://img.shields.io/crates/d/prefix-trie)](https://crates.io/crates/prefix-trie)
[![docs.rs](https://img.shields.io/docsrs/prefix-trie/latest)](https://docs.rs/prefix-trie/latest/prefix_trie/)
[![license](https://img.shields.io/crates/l/prefix-trie/0.2.2)](https://crates.io/crates/prefix-trie)

# Prefix-Trie

This crate provides a simple prefix tree for IP prefixes. Any lookup performs longest-prefix
match.

## Comparison with related projects

[`ip_network_table-deps-treebitmap`](https://crates.io/crates/ip_network_table-deps-treebitmap)
provides an IP lookup table, similar to `PrefixMap`.

The following compares the two approaches in the case of *dense* or *sparse* maps. Each test case
performs 100'000 modifications or lookups. However, the dense cases randomly pick any IPv4
address, while the sparse case only picks 20 different IPv4 addresses. See `benches/benchmark.rs`
for more details.

| Operation       | Mode   | `PrefixMap` | `treebitmap` | factor |
|-----------------|--------|-------------|--------------|--------|
| Insert & Remove | dense  | **31.78ms** | 47.52ms      | ~1.5x  |
| Lookup          | dense  | 32.36ms     | **8.409ms**  | ~0.25x |
| Insert & Remove | sparse | **6.645ms** | 7.329ms      | ~1.1x  |
| Lookup          | sparse | **8.394ms** | 12.30ms      | ~1.5x  |

In addition, `prefix-trie` includes a `PrefixSet` analogous to `std::collections::HashSet`,
including union, intersection and difference operations that are implemented as simultaneous
tree traversals. Further, `prefix-trie` has an interface similar to `std::collections`, and
includes methods for accessing all children of a node. Finally, it offers a general
longest-prefix match that is not limited to individual addresses.

## Description of the Tree

The tree is structured as follows: Each node consists of a prefix, a container for a potential
value (`Option`), and two optional children. Adding a new child, or traversing into the tree is
done as follows: we look at the most significant bit that is **not** part of the prefix
itself. If it is not set, then we take the left branch, and otherwise, we take the right one.

## Traversals

Any iteration over all elements in the tree is implemented as a graph traversal that will yield
elements in lexicographic order (with the exception of mutable iteration of the
`PrefixMap`). This also includes the iteration over the union, intersection, or difference of
two `PrefixSet`s, which are implemented as simultaneous tree traversals. Further, calling
`retain` will also traverse the tree only once, removing elements during the traversal.

## Operations on the tree

There are several operations one can do on the tree. Regular inserts are handled using the
`Entry` structure. An `Entry` is a pointer to a location in the tree to either insert a value or
modify an existing one. Removals however are different.

The following are the computational complexities of the functions, where `n` is the number of
elements in the tree.

| Operation                                 | Complexity |
|-------------------------------------------|------------|
| `entry`, `insert`                         | `O(log n)` |
| `remove`, `remove_keep_tree`              | `O(log n)` |
| `remove_children` (calling `drop` on `T`) | `O(n)`     |
| `get`, `get_lpm`, `get_mut`               | `O(log n)` |
| `retain`                                  | `O(n)`     |
| `clear` (calling `drop` on `T`)           | `O(n)`     |
| Operations on `map::Entry`                | `O(1)`     |
| `len` and `is_empty`                      | `O(1)`     |

There are three kinds of removals you! can do:

- `PrefixMap::remove` will remove an entry from the tree and modify the tree structure as if
  the value was never inserted before. `PrefixMap::remove` will always exactly revert the
  operation of `PrefixMap::insert`. When only calling this function to remove elements, you
  are guaranteed that the tree structure is indistinguishable to a different tree where you
  only inserted elements.
- `PrefixMap::remove_children` will remove all entries that are contained within the given
  prefix. This operation will search for the node with the shortest prefix length that is
  contained within the given prefix and remove it, including all of its children.
- `PrefixMap::remove_keep_tree` will not change anything in the tree structure. It will only
  remove a value from a node. As soon as you call `remove_keep_tree` once on a tree structure,
  the tree will no longer be optimal.

## TODO

Migrate to a TreeBitMap, described by [W. Eatherton, Z. Dittia, G. Varghes](https://doi.org/10.1145/997150.997160).

Commit message:

Clarify that both IPv4 and IPv6 is supported

Readme.md, after:

[![CI test](https://img.shields.io/github/actions/workflow/status/tiborschneider/prefix-trie/test.yml)](https://github.com/tiborschneider/prefix-trie/actions)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/tiborschneider/prefix-trie/branch/main/graph/badge.svg?token=EEJXNNURMW)](https://codecov.io/gh/tiborschneider/prefix-trie)
[![version](https://img.shields.io/crates/v/prefix-trie)](https://crates.io/crates/prefix-trie)
[![downloads](https://img.shields.io/crates/d/prefix-trie)](https://crates.io/crates/prefix-trie)
[![docs.rs](https://img.shields.io/docsrs/prefix-trie/latest)](https://docs.rs/prefix-trie/latest/prefix_trie/)
[![license](https://img.shields.io/crates/l/prefix-trie/0.2.2)](https://crates.io/crates/prefix-trie)

# Prefix-Trie

This crate provides a simple prefix tree for IP prefixes. Any lookup performs longest-prefix
match. This crate supports both IPv4 and IPv6 (from either [ipnet](https://docs.rs/ipnet/2.10.0)
or [ipnetwork](https://crates.io/crates/ipnetwork)). It also supports any type `(R, u8)`, where 
`R` is any unsigned primitive integer (`u8`, `u16`, `u32`, `u64`, `u128`, `usize`).

## Comparison with related projects

[`ip_network_table-deps-treebitmap`](https://crates.io/crates/ip_network_table-deps-treebitmap)
provides an IP lookup table, similar to `PrefixMap`.

The following compares the two approaches in the case of *dense* or *sparse* maps. Each test case
performs 100'000 modifications or lookups. However, the dense cases randomly pick any IPv4
address, while the sparse case only picks 20 different IPv4 addresses. See `benches/benchmark.rs`
for more details.

| Operation       | Mode   | `PrefixMap` | `treebitmap` | factor |
|-----------------|--------|-------------|--------------|--------|
| Insert & Remove | dense  | **31.78ms** | 47.52ms      | ~1.5x  |
| Lookup          | dense  | 32.36ms     | **8.409ms**  | ~0.25x |
| Insert & Remove | sparse | **6.645ms** | 7.329ms      | ~1.1x  |
| Lookup          | sparse | **8.394ms** | 12.30ms      | ~1.5x  |

In addition, `prefix-trie` includes a `PrefixSet` analogous to `std::collections::HashSet`,
including union, intersection and difference operations that are implemented as simultaneous
tree traversals. Further, `prefix-trie` has an interface similar to `std::collections`, and
includes methods for accessing all children of a node. Finally, it offers a general
longest-prefix match that is not limited to individual addresses.

## Description of the Tree

The tree is structured as follows: Each node consists of a prefix, a container for a potential
value (`Option`), and two optional children. Adding a new child, or traversing into the tree is
done as follows: we look at the most significant bit that is **not** part of the prefix
itself. If it is not set, then we take the left branch, and otherwise, we take the right one.

## Traversals

Any iteration over all elements in the tree is implemented as a graph traversal that will yield
elements in lexicographic order (with the exception of mutable iteration of the
`PrefixMap`). This also includes the iteration over the union, intersection, or difference of
two `PrefixSet`s, which are implemented as simultaneous tree traversals. Further, calling
`retain` will also traverse the tree only once, removing elements during the traversal.

## Operations on the tree

There are several operations one can do on the tree. Regular inserts are handled using the
`Entry` structure. An `Entry` is a pointer to a location in the tree to either insert a value or
modify an existing one. Removals however are different.

The following are the computational complexities of the functions, where `n` is the number of
elements in the tree.

| Operation                                 | Complexity |
|-------------------------------------------|------------|
| `entry`, `insert`                         | `O(log n)` |
| `remove`, `remove_keep_tree`              | `O(log n)` |
| `remove_children` (calling `drop` on `T`) | `O(n)`     |
| `get`, `get_lpm`, `get_mut`               | `O(log n)` |
| `retain`                                  | `O(n)`     |
| `clear` (calling `drop` on `T`)           | `O(n)`     |
| Operations on `map::Entry`                | `O(1)`     |
| `len` and `is_empty`                      | `O(1)`     |

There are three kinds of removals you! can do:

- `PrefixMap::remove` will remove an entry from the tree and modify the tree structure as if
  the value was never inserted before. `PrefixMap::remove` will always exactly revert the
  operation of `PrefixMap::insert`. When only calling this function to remove elements, you
  are guaranteed that the tree structure is indistinguishable to a different tree where you
  only inserted elements.
- `PrefixMap::remove_children` will remove all entries that are contained within the given
  prefix. This operation will search for the node with the shortest prefix length that is
  contained within the given prefix and remove it, including all of its children.
- `PrefixMap::remove_keep_tree` will not change anything in the tree structure. It will only
  remove a value from a node. As soon as you call `remove_keep_tree` once on a tree structure,
  the tree will no longer be optimal.

## TODO

Migrate to a TreeBitMap, described by [W. Eatherton, Z. Dittia, G. Varghes](https://doi.org/10.1145/997150.997160).
